So, please take a seat and be quiet.
We start with the, unfortunately, I already did the last talk for this deaf room today
with Rui who's talking about controlling a robot using ZX Spectrum.
Okay, thank you.
So, that's my name, if you need to contact me on top.
I'm a software developer by profession and I do weird stuff on my hobby time.
So let's start with this.
So, we will talk about all these subjects because this was a project that took about 11 months to do in part time.
So, we have little time so let's go through it.
So, how this started in the beginning, I'm part of the LogZX Spectrum Museum.
I'm an active member and the idea was we had a stand in 2022 on Lisbon Games Week,
which is a show that talks about games and stuff like that.
And we had this stand and we wanted to actually have more people on the stand.
And if you can see on the right side of that photo, there was a bunch of arcade machines next to it.
And that attracts a lot of people.
And there was also this kind of claw machine that allows you to pick up stuff.
And since it was free stuff, people was packing in a line just to go to that machine.
So, the idea is we want that, we want to have a lot of people to go to our stand and make it more successful.
So, I somehow convinced the guys that we should do something about it.
And so, we set these goals that we want to attract people to the stand.
We want to actually make something like a claw or something similar, then end it up as a robot arm.
And we would like to also create a game that integrates with the robot arm to be more interactive.
So, I managed to convince them that this was possible.
A tip for you guys is bring the right t-shirt and then be crazy enough and they will trust you.
So, what was the plan is to use a 48K spectrum and a robot arm.
And we need to find one that doesn't break the bank because they are expensive machinery.
And we want finally to integrate it with basic so that we can program directly in basic without having to know the specifics of the robot in particular.
So, our plan was really simple. So, we have a spectrum, we find a robot arm and then we send some data to it and we receive some data to it and it's easy, right?
Not really because that's the big problem to solve.
So, what I did was found a robot arm.
So, we found this lab vault 50 to 50 that is discontinued already about 2002 or 2003.
And I bought it online for a fair amount but it was missing some stuff.
Basically, the emergency stop button was not available which is the problem.
And that little thing that is very useful is called the pendant and it's not available, they don't sell it anymore and I can't find one if you have one contact me.
Okay, so that simplifies the coding of the robot by the way.
So, it has two serial interfaces, one binary one, one text based and the binary one, since there is no official documentation for it because it was a closed source system.
There is a research paper that actually did the reverse engineering of it.
You can find it here but it seemed more complex and harder to debug.
So, I went for the text based one which fortunately has a help command that helps a little bit out to actually interface with it and it's better for actually debugging it with the commands and try to understand how it works.
So, some reverse engineering was needed.
So, the first thing that was needed is determined that the protocol is actually, the text protocol is actually bidirectional.
So, we need to send commands and get actually some data back and finding exactly what is the setup for the serial communication between the robot, the controller of the robot arm.
So, that means that we can update our plan.
So, we have a spectrum anyway. Now, we have this specific robot which has a specific controller and this controller has a lot of interfaces to simulate cells like industrial cells and communication with other robots.
But, we will use the simple part. So, basically what this does is send controls to the motors of the robot arm and get some feedback from it like encoders feedback position where each of the parts of the arms are.
So, what we need to do is come up with something that actually communicates with the robot. So, this is our goal and we know that this has to work with serial interface.
So, why do we need one? Because there was something called Sinclair interface one and I don't know if you guys know about it but it says something from Sinclair and it was BitBang.
This means that the software is actually hitting the bits of the hardware just to find out the protocol, the serial protocol which is very expensive in runtime.
And it doesn't have a standard pinout which is a brand mark of Sinclair incompatible with everything and then you know you have to sell your own stuff.
It reminds me another company, Apple.
So, there is another option which is a Spectrum 138K but again it's a BitBang interface and it has a very weird connector that is hard to find nowadays.
And all of those that exist, pre-exist have the same problem. They are BitBang which means it will steal us a lot of CPU.
And since the Spectrum is 3.5MHz, we need to help it and not make it difficult.
And we wanted to actually use the iconic Spectrum 48K to just be sure that it works with this one.
So, our updated plan is to actually build some hardware to actually do that and have a serial reward in hardware that will eventually also do flow control so that we don't lose with buffer overflows and stuff like that.
So, that means that we have to implement that interface that goes into the socket of the Spectrum and then actually do the communication.
Besides this, since nowadays we don't like to work with cassettes to put the software in, it's better to actually find another interface and DivMMC is one good one for that because it allows you to have SD card with your software.
And more importantly, it allows you to actually have an extra port behind so that you can plug the device that you are developing to because there is no emulators here, the hardware is new.
We have to actually try it on the hardware.
Okay. So, how do we build that?
So, we know that there is the Spectrum interface bus that has all the data lines and control lines that we need.
We need to actually define an address decoder so that we can actually access, read and write all the registers from the expected UART.
So, it needs to define, enable, read and write so that you can actually control that ship.
That ship will get data and control and configuration from the 8-bit bus.
It needs some kind of crystal so that it has a stable clock signal and in this case it was chosen to be 16 MHz.
And then we need a line driver, something that will actually convert the 5 volts that we have on the board or connected to the Spectrum to the minus 12 and plus 12 that we actually need for the serial line.
And then we will do communication and transmit and receive and we also want to do RTS and CTS and shake for flow control by hardware.
Okay. So, like the other colleague said a few sessions ago, this was what was in the drawer.
So, it's this old PAL encoder chip for decoding logic or making logic expressions.
It allows for 9 input lines and 8 input or output but with some tweaks you'll see later why.
So, then select the UART chip that has at least 2 UARTs and by some luck it has at least 64 bytes of buffers which will save us in the long run.
You'll see why. And we managed to work it with 16 MHz and then we need a pump driver to actually give us the right amount of voltage on the output like I said.
And the max the 238 just because we need 4 inputs and 4 output lines because we are only checking the lines that we actually need and not implementing the entire setup of RS-232 or serial protocol.
But we can do it later. So, this is the actual schematic. It's not complex but I'm not going through it. You can later see and check the GitHub.
Okay. And so, this is the... We need 8 address lines or sorry, 8 registers for controlling the work.
It has a lot more registers but only needs 8 addresses.
And there is a special concern here because the spectrum has the ULA which is what makes a spectrum a spectrum that maps the port 254 as its control port but it only actually uses the address A0 as being 0.
So, every even address is reserved for the ULA. So, we need to use an address that is even. Sorry, odd.
And so, we will hop every odd port between 0 and 15 for the first comm and between 16 and 31 for the second comm.
We have to be mindful that port 31 is being used by Kempion and Logistic.
So, if you want this to be compatible, we still have to change this. My plan is to use something like an index register like we used to have in VGA cards and stuff like that.
So, we'll use only 2 registers.
So, this is the prototype board. I have it here if you want to take a look after this.
And so, mapping what we said before, there is the interface bus, there is the address decoding logic with the PAL and there is the UART with 2 serial UARTs in there, the crystal, and we have the line driver.
And here you will see the hack that we had to do because PAL didn't exactly allow us to program every combination.
So, we had to do a workaround and there is a small cable in the back hiding the hack.
But we can fix that later.
So, how do we interface this with basic?
For the time, Spectrum was at pretty advanced concepts.
Basically, channels is a new concept.
Back then, that is basically the equivalent of a device driver.
So, you can plug in new drivers if you do the right thing into the ROM and into the system variables.
The advantage of having this is that we have an abstraction layer that then allows us to use the devices and allows basic to actually control them as expected.
So, this just keeps this kind of information, the input output routines and the special ID so that you can ask for it specifically.
Besides channels, we have some other advanced concepts, concept that is streams.
And streams is just a way to actually do the same we do today with streams.
It's just a byte stream that can go as input or output and you just address it by ID and you actually create an instance of the channel or an instance of using that specific driver for that hardware.
So, again, this allows integration with basic so we can use those commands and directly without actually having to know how it actually works.
To know this, we have to actually understand how this abstraction layer is implemented and there is a very good book which is the Spectrum Disassembly, the ULI,
and explains in detail, but you have to go really deep down to understand how it works, but that's the solution to actually make this work.
So, by default, the ROM basic creates four channels, the keyboard, the screen, workspace or scratch, internal buffer and four printer.
And we can add more channels to this, although the original ROM had the bug and didn't work except for these four, so it needs to be extended.
But if you reserve the memory in the right places in the system calls, it works as expected if you replace the open and close routines.
It has also defined a lot of streams by default and we can have up to 19 streams, but we should only mess with the last 15 because the others are internal and I wouldn't advise to actually change one and two because it can also mess the basic.
So, after a lot of headbanging and problems, including during the event, it was able to actually have a working version with transmit and receive integrated with the ROM.
So, we have two new channels named one and two for COM one and COM two.
And like I said, we need to have an open close, a new stream to, sorry, routine for that stream.
Currently, the coding GitHub is hard coded, so we can actually change the parameters for the ward because it was quick and dirty and we had to actually make it work for the event.
And you'll see why in a bit.
And we also have our code of the parameters to actually set up the serial line.
So, what we did in the driver is to actually define, like I said, two new channels with ID one and two that correspond to COM one and COM two.
And we need to properly reserve memory for that.
So, regarding the robot controller, that big box that comes with the robot, it actually controls the motors, the feedback from the encoders and the limit switches so that the robot arm doesn't just blow up to the side.
And it does the movement integration when you go from position A to position B as it needs to integrate all the several axes so that it ends in the right position.
And it has a bunch of protocol commands that we need to actually interact with.
So, these are some of them.
So, the program Rdome reset, it needed to actually position the robot from the beginning.
The torque and tree is just to release the motor so that you can position the robot by hand, which is very useful.
Then run is to actually move at a certain speed to a specific position in all axes.
And get port and set port is just basically to be able to interact with other systems.
In particular, the programmatic system that was implemented.
So, what did we need to do?
The first application was to actually control the robot.
So, we made a small application in basic that did some commands and then it did some move commands with the run command in a text.
And it had a special menu that allows us to actually define and list a bunch of points so that we can then work the robot like a puppet and position the several positions that we want.
And we just have a list and we go through that list according to some specific order.
So, we can list and you can save these in particular and we can also define each of the axes and then position the robot in real time.
Okay, next we need to implement the pneumatic reaper to make it more fast to be used in the event.
So, it consists of a suction cup, a motor that creates the vacuum and a valve that actually releases the vacuum so that you can release the parts.
And then this was the first version working in the test bench.
But as usual, nothing works correctly when we plug all in, right?
So, the robot didn't have enough power.
So, as soon as we tried to use it, it just didn't work.
I had to add a special extra relay and put some extra power from the outside so that we can actually integrate this new model.
That's the cable you see there, like here.
It's having to plug in more power so that I could have the pneumatic thing working.
And next.
So, besides that, this was a live event.
So, there were kids around that were people around and they could put their hands near the robot and that will mean that someone could get hurt.
So, we had to define a display stand.
So, I designed this also to support the extra weight of the robot arm.
Here you can see the first iteration of it.
And you can see that's a kitchen cabinet that was later transformed to look nicer.
On this one, you can see actually setting up the stand in the event.
You can probably recognize that t-shirt from previous years on Fosdom.
And as you can see on the right, sorry, on the center now, I was still hacking during the event to make it work because transmit was actually working fine.
But receive was sometimes not triggering the right sequence because there was an issue with the ROM.
It didn't like carriage returns for some reason to hacky around it.
So, and then this was when it was already working and doing some interesting stuff just to try it out.
So, then I developed the tic-tac-toe program that was inspired around Wargames movie.
And tried to make it as educational as possible.
So, the top is the tic-tac-toe is drawn using lines and commands from basic and then using UDGs or user developer graphics from basic.
And then you can actually play the game.
But it's not yet integrated with the robot movements because it was not possible in the time frame.
So, it should be another two days work or something once I have the time to go for it.
So, I would like to show you a simple video.
Quick one because I don't have much time.
So, the robot is moving.
I'm with my hands on the spectrum controlling it and giving some inputs.
And then trying to move and actually confirm that the suction is actually working.
So, you'll see that the suction will actually grab the part.
And I will be a lot happier when this started working.
Okay.
So, something like this is something that you don't do alone or is in isolation.
So, I had a bunch of friends and people from the museum that somehow helped.
And a special guest that came up to the fair, which also helped.
It was really fun.
So, we do this kind of stuff to enjoy ourselves and we cherish these moments and the legacy that is behind it.
And you should do this to enjoy yourself.
So, this is the end.
If you have any questions, you can see the GitHub repository and fire away any questions you have.
I'll give you a few minutes for questions.
Yes.
Anybody?
At least I explained everything.
Yeah. Everything was so clear.
I can tell you some other quick, interesting things like the communication with the robot.
What happened with the ROM is that when you send a carriage return to the ROM,
it thinks it's an, sorry, not a carriage return, a line feed.
It thinks it's to abort the input in basic.
Somehow, they coded it like that.
So, once I found that out, I had to actually see what the robot was sending.
And it was not sending line feed and carriage return, it was just sending line feed.
So, every input I sent, I would get a line feed and then it would stop my input.
And then I'd run it again and then it didn't work.
And then I ran it again, it worked again.
So, it was intermittent every time.
Until I found it was because the carriage return line feed, that was not matching.
So, the driver had to actually swallow the line feed.
And then it didn't work because that didn't have a carriage return either.
So, I had to actually swallow the line feed and inject the carriage return.
And then stuff started working.
And that's what I did during the show, to actually make it work.
Hope you liked it.
Oh, by the way, we didn't finish the game, but it will be done eventually.
Last chance for question.
If not, many, many thanks, Louis.
You're welcome.
And thanks, Sebastian, for taking over this year, because I didn't have the time to handle it.
So, and if you want to help, it's quite a lot of work to find speakers,
find speakers again because you don't have enough.
And then select talks because you have too many and stuff like that.
So, if you want to help, then contact us on the mailing list, maybe.
And thanks. See you next year, maybe.
Thank you.
Yeah, you make us cry a little bit.
Why?
We burned, we spent the years.
I was building and selling the joystick cards.
Oh, okay, okay.
The 8084.
In the school, they allow us to print the boards.
Yeah.
So, I start to print and soldering and selling the joystick cards.
I hope to eventually sell this, but since it's open source, anyone can actually set it up.
You can see the one behind it.
There is a hack with a wire.
Yeah.
Because the pile doesn't allow you to configure everything in the pins you want.
Although I was following the input output, it was fine, but the combination that I needed didn't work.
So, I had to do a hack and do it elsewhere.
So, the connector, you got that from a mouser or something and chopped the ends.
Yeah, yeah.
You need to chop the ends.
And you need to move the key.
Yeah, because then it...
And then, it's the thickness of the PCB, so you can just stick the PCB...
Yeah.
But there is a better way.
You can actually put a metal part that has pins, and then you solder on this side, it will never leave.
That's what I'm going to do next.
Nice.
I want to ask you, what did you use to program the dial chips, because I can't find a decent program.
I have it there, but you can see it on the repository, on the GitHub.
On the product information.
Yeah.
It's there.
I'm using something...
It was from...
Not Palazzo, but it's something similar.
Okay.
And the software is still available.
You can download it.
Okay.
You can use Windows 95 or something, but it runs on the latest ones.
And it allows you to actually program that fine.
Okay, thank you.
We'll look at the other one.
Yeah.
Nice work.
If you look there, I think it's even...
This kitable is there or something.
I'm not sure.
Okay.
There is an example with the hardware to program it.
Thank you.
And did it work?
The other...
What?
I mean, did it attract more people?
It did.
I don't know if there is another video.
Yeah.
In the...
Let me try.
If you go to FOSDOM and you open this one.
Yeah.
Is the screen still on or they...
Shop it off.
Sorry.
So here you can see a video that was done by the museum.
Right.
And the idea was to...
This is presentation.
Anyway.
And the idea was to...
It's in Portuguese, unfortunately, because it was for that audience.
But it's showing up.
Thank you.
Showing up how it works.
So as you see, it's a huge beast.
Yeah.
So that's why I couldn't bring it.
This weights like 12 kilograms or something like that.
Plus there is the box is hidden inside.
I also had a VT420 terminal inside because it was helpful for debug.
You can put it in debug mode and you can see the actual characters in the serial.
That's how I found the line feed was missing the carriage return.
And I used that to actually decode the rest.
The last two nights I didn't sleep.
It was like go, go, go until it worked.
And then on the second day from a five day event,
it started working and I left it alone for a while.
What?
Reverse demo effect.
Yes, maybe.
But I couldn't make the game actually work at the time because you need feedback so that
when you say put your... the arm here, right?
It goes to the arm...
How much time does it take?
You don't know.
You need to wait for the feedback.
And the feedback was not working because of the line feed.
So my first experiment was like I send the command and then wait, then enter.
For the next command I just wait for the robot to do the movement and then enter.
It was like interactive.
But then when it started working, everything started working.
But I didn't have time to... and I needed to sleep.
After two days without sleep.
First two minutes.
What's the reason you put it with the ZX Spectrum?
Did you stand as a child?
I did, I did.
Because I'm part of the museum.
I participate with demos and doing stuff.
One of your specific...
Yeah.
To start picking up the...
But I also do stuff.
You find so many very interesting things.
Yeah.
Why is that?
I've been growing up with Commodore 65 or 20.
Yeah, I also...
I would do that with Commodore.
Yeah.